Writer and WriterT documentation site pages (#3618)
typelevel/cats: docs/src/main/mdoc/datatypes/writert.md

---
layout: docs
title:  "WriterT"
section: "data"
source: "core/src/main/scala/cats/data/WriterT.scala"
scaladoc: "#cats.data.WriterT"
---
# WriterT

`WriterT[F[_], L, V]` is a type wrapper on an `F[(L,
V)]`. Speaking technically, it is a monad transformer for [`Writer`](https://typelevel.org/cats/datatypes/writer.html),
but you don't need to know what that means for it to be
useful.

## Composition

`WriterT` can be more convenient to work with than using

> `F[Writer[L, V]]` directly, this because it exposes operations that allow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`F[Writer[L, V]]` directly, because it exposes operations that allow
```

val optionWriterT2 : WriterT[Option, String, Int] = WriterT(Some(("writerT value 1", 123)))
val optionWriterT3 : WriterT[Option, String, Int] = WriterT.valueT(None)

val eitherWriterT1 : WriterT[Either[String, *], String, Int] = WriterT(Right(("writerT value 1", 123)))
val eitherWriterT2 : WriterT[Either[String, *], String, Int] = WriterT(Right(("writerT value 1", 123)))
val eitherWriterT3 : WriterT[Either[String, *], String, Int] = WriterT.valueT(Left("error!!!"))
```

```scala mdoc
// This returns a Some since both are Some
for {
    v1 <- optionWriterT1
    v2 <- optionWriterT2
} yield v1 + v2

// This returns a None since one is a None
for {
    v1 <- optionWriterT1
    v2 <- optionWriterT2
    v3 <- optionWriterT3
} yield v1 + v2 + v3

// This returns a Right since both are Right
for {
    v1 <- eitherWriterT1
    v2 <- eitherWriterT2
} yield v1 + v2

// This returns a Left since one is a Left
for {
    v1 <- eitherWriterT1
    v2 <- eitherWriterT2
    v3 <- eitherWriterT3
} yield v1 + v2 + v3
```

Just for completeness, we can have a look at the same example, but
with
[`Validated`](https://typelevel.org/cats/datatypes/validated.html)

> since it as a slightly different behaviour then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
since it as a slightly different behaviour than
```

[`Validated`](https://typelevel.org/cats/datatypes/validated.html)
only extends [`Applicative`](https://typelevel.org/cats/typeclasses/applicative.html), but not [`Monad`](https://typelevel.org/cats/typeclasses/monad.html).

```scala mdoc:silent
import cats.data.Validated
import cats.data.Validated.{Invalid, Valid}
import cats.implicits._

val validatedWriterT1 : WriterT[Validated[String, *], String, Int] = WriterT(Valid(("writerT value 1", 123)))
val validatedWriterT2 : WriterT[Validated[String, *], String, Int] = WriterT(Valid(("writerT value 1", 123)))
val validatedWriterT3 : WriterT[Validated[String, *], String, Int] =
WriterT(Invalid("error 1!!!") : Validated[String, (String, Int)])
val validatedWriterT4 : WriterT[Validated[String, *], String, Int] = WriterT(Invalid("error 2!!!"): Validated[String, (String, Int)])
```

```scala mdoc
// THIS returns a Right since both are Right
(validatedWriterT1,
validatedWriterT2
).mapN((v1, v2) => v1 + v2)

// This returns a Left since one is a Left
(validatedWriterT1,
 validatedWriterT2,
 validatedWriterT3,
 validatedWriterT4
).mapN((v1, v2, v3, v4) => v1 + v2 + v3 + v4)
```

## Construct a WriterT

> A `WriterT` can be built starting from multiple values. Here is the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `WriterT` can be constructed in different ways. Here is the
```

value `V` wrapped into an `F`. Notice how it requires:
* [`Monoid[L]`](https://typelevel.org/cats/typeclasses/monoid.html), since it uses the `empty` value from the typeclass.
to fill the `L` value not specified in the input.
* [`Applicative[F]`](https://typelevel.org/cats/typeclasses/applicative.html) to modify the inner value.

```scala mdoc:nest
  import cats.instances.option._

  val value : Option[Int] = Some(123)

  WriterT.liftF[Option, String, Int](value)
```

`put[F[_], L, V](v: V)(l: L)(implicit applicativeF: Applicative[F]): WriterT[F, L, V]`
:  As soon as there is an [`Applicative`](https://typelevel.org/cats/typeclasses/applicative.html) instance of `F`, this function
creates the datatype starting from the inner [`Writer`](https://typelevel.org/cats/datatypes/writer.html)'s values.

```scala mdoc:nest
  WriterT.put[Option, String, Int](123)("initial value")
```

`putT[F[_], L, V](vf: F[V])(l: L)(implicit functorF: Functor[F]): WriterT[F, L, V]`
:  Exactly as `put`, but the value `V` is already wrapped into `F`

```scala mdoc:nest
  WriterT.putT[Option, String, Int](Some(123))("initial value")
```

## Operations

> Into the [Writer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the [Writer
```

definition](https://typelevel.org/cats/datatypes/writer.html#definition)
section, we showed how it is actually a `WriterT`. Therefore, all the
operations described into [Writer
operations](https://typelevel.org/cats/datatypes/writer.html#operations)
are valid for `WriterT` as well.

The only aspect we want to remark here is the following sentence from
[`Writer`](https://typelevel.org/cats/datatypes/writer.html)'s page:

> Most of the `WriterT` functions require a `Functor[F]` or
> `Monad[F]` instance. However, Cats provides all the necessary
> instances for the `Id` type, therefore we don't have to worry about
> them.

In the case of `WriterT`, the user needs to ensure the required
instances are present. Cats still provide a lot of default instances,
so there's a high chance you could find what you are searching for
with the right `import`.

## Example

> As en example, we can consider a simple naive console application that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example, we can consider a simple naive console application that
```
